A groundbreaking new
study of lucid dreaming
suggests that people can
heal psychological trauma
while they're asleep and may
even show potential for healing
on the physical level.
This is Gaia News.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
A lucid dream is
a dream in which
you're actively aware of the
fact that you're dreaming
and may even have some
control over what happens.
While scientists
have been studying
this fascinating
phenomenon for decades,
recently, the research focus
has shifted to the potential
for healing within this state.
Charlie Morley has taught
thousands of people
worldwide how to lucid dream.
He was involved in the most
recent study of lucid dream
healing conducted by the
Institute of Noetic Sciences
or IONS.
Lucid dreaming is
like being conscious
within the unconscious mind.
So there's a whole host
of healing benefits
that we can gain
from lucid dreaming.
In fact, many of the things you
can treat with hypnotherapy,
you can also treat
through lucid dreaming.
Now there's some very
interesting studies
and preliminary
research that points
to lucid dreaming being one of
the most powerful interventions
for people with
nightmares and especially
PTSD-triggered nightmares.
In the IONS study,
a group of 49 people
with diagnosed post-traumatic
stress disorder
were given instruction by
Charlie into lucid dreaming.
Over the course
of one week, they
were taught various
induction techniques
with a specific emphasis
on making a dream
plan for healing.
So the techniques that
we use for this study
started with the basics--
keeping a dream diary, learning
to check dream science,
reality checking
during the day, all
of your classic lucid
dreaming techniques.
But what we've placed
a lot of emphasis on
was the dream
plan, planning what
you want to do in your
first or next lucid dream.
If I were to become lucid within
those recurring nightmares,
what could I actually do
to help affect healing?
What we discovered
was that simply
by becoming lucid in a
recurring PTSD nightmare
that already had a healing
response because it's like, oh
wow, I'm not really
back in Iraq,
I'm simply dreaming
I'm back in Iraq.
But once we trained people
not only to get lucid and know
that they're dreaming, but to
then intentionally interact
with the source of their fear,
or the source of their trauma,
or the thing that
they've been running
from in their nightmares
to actually turn and face
it had a really powerful
healing response.
And we had some really good
data that we gathered from that.
The data that was
collected consisted
of a number of clinical
questionnaires administered
before, during, and
after the study.
These were then
analyzed to determine
whether the participants'
PTSD scores had been
affected by the experience.
Doctor Garret Yount, a molecular
neurobiologist at IONS,
led the study.
We have 49 dreamers
total and 36 of them
had lucid dreams
during the week.
So that's 73% of them
experiencing the lucid dream
during that workshop.
This is tremendous.
The headlines, though, are we
have the first data coming out
from our primary outcome
measure and that's
the PTSD severity scale.
So everybody going into the
study was above a threshold
according to this
standardized scale.
And the average
dropped way below
and it stayed down
for three weeks.
It's really significant
that this kind
of relief from symptoms
would last that long.
Another very impactful
outcome during it
was all the testimonials from
the dreamers saying things
like, my nightmares are gone,
I'm so happy, thank you.
This is the healing work.
Talking about the
years of psychotherapy
they've been through,
they've never
been able to have these
kinds of breakthroughs.
What is it about the
experience that brings
about such profound healing?
PTSD is very difficult to treat
with conventional methods.
There's something
about the lucid dream
where you have access and
also in a very safe way
to be able to process trauma
that's very difficult to reach
with talk therapy.
Post-traumatic stress disorder
is a disempowering experience.
Training yourself to wake
up within your dreams
and take control or direction
over the dream state
is one of the most empowering
experiences you can have.
That in itself, I
think, holds the key
to what is lowering
people's PTSD scores when
they learn to lucid dream.
In addition to questionnaires,
researchers also
collected saliva samples from a
small subgroup of participants
to look at the effect on an
important biomarker called
salivary alpha amylase.
Our hypothesis was a
healing lucid dream will
have such a powerful effect
on not only the mind,
but the body that
we would expect
to see a lowering
of inflammation
in the biomarkers of the saliva
after a healing lucid dream.
So this would be the first
study of lucid dreaming
and a physiological marker.
So this is basically
a marker and it
would be at least one step
into really clear evidence
that this inner experience
of having a healing
inside of a lucid dream
could have physical effect
at the body that can be
measured at the body level.
Researchers are still
analyzing those results.
And while they will need to be
repeated with a larger sample
group, the findings could
have great implications.
If we are able to get good
data from this biomarker,
that will open up
the door to look
at other physiological markers
and ultimately other types
of illnesses.
I think, ultimately,
this may really
turn out to be a beautiful
model for studying
the mind-body connection.
A lot of other ways
that have tried
to prove the
mind-body connection,
you can say it's kind
of outside influence.
You could say it's
the placebo effect.
You could say it's to do with
the other people in the study.
The lucid dream is
a closed circuit.
You're literally
asleep, so the variables
are incredibly limited.
So if you can prove
that the mind affects
the body through
lucid dreaming, you
prove something
quite remarkable.
For a new perspective,
this is Gaia News.
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.
[MUSIC PLAYING]